Hey Guys welcome to the course.
In this lecture I'm going to introduce a concept we call the Goldilocks syndrome.
Now what exactly that means is it has to do with when you have a project and you go out there and you
start asking freelancers or freelance firms for bids and you start kind of bringing them in.
You start looking at a board of all your different project bids a lot of people have what we call the
Goldilocks syndrome where they don't pick based off of essentially valid reasons for working with the
freelancer.
They just look at price.
And so what they'll do is to look at the cheapest option the most expensive option and then just make
a quick rational decision that if the price is somewhere in the middle they're going to go with that.
So obviously this is something that you want to avoid.
Right.
But more importantly you need to understand why exactly that's a bad idea.
It might seem reasonable to someone who's brand new to this that when they see a bunch of bids you know
someone might be charging too much and someone might be charging too little and that's that's actually
rational to assume that the cheapest bid is probably someone who is artificially subsidizing their price.
Right.
Probably some of these brand new to this so they know they have to put the project price really low.
That's always a bad idea because you know what happens if that person doesn't like the price once they're
halfway through the project they're much much more likely to quit on you and you have no idea what their
track records like.
And the flipside though when you have an extra high price you might just assume that they're either
overcharging you or they probably misunderstood the project requirements or there's a lot more going
into that bid than you ever would need.
So a lot of people then assume OK it has to be somewhere in the middle.
I'm going to give you a couple of ways to look at the price a little bit more dynamically and make a
better decision.
Okay so never judge the price based off its relationship to the other bids.
If you took advantage of what's called private bidding and any of these platforms that we covered you
probably get to skip over this problem because a lot of times if someone bids 100 and someone bids 200
someone will probably bid like a 110 or they might bid 80 it's kind of like the price is right where
someone always has to bid somewhere where they think it's going to look the best.
Now it's unavoidable that people do this and typically if they're bidding there and they're putting
their price relative someone else's price then they're not being honest.
They should be charging you exactly what they think it's going to take and they should be using their
own measurements and their own techniques for determining that amount.
But the best way of avoiding the Goldilocks syndrome is actually just to think about your organization
and your project as a whole.
We talked about this a little bit in the last lecture but what's really important for you to understand
is one take a quick think about how much expertise you have with outsourcing or contracting in general.
Have you worked one on one with the freelancer or a contractor before.
Have you been a freelancer or contractor.
How many contractors do you work with regularly.
If you've worked with a lot of them then it's worth saying that you probably have a little bit of expertise
with this.
Now what that means to me and what that means to you is that if you have a lot of expertise that probably
means you're going to be more capable of handling a contractor and you're going to be capable of handling
a contractor doesn't have as much experience as say one of the more polished ones.
Now a lot of what you're paying for when you hire a freelancer or a contractor is you're paying for
their autonomy and their ability to think on their feet.
The more upright the more you pay and the higher the price goes the more likely that person is going
to be able to make judgments.
And on the spot decisions that can benefit your project and you're basically saying I trust this person
to have more autonomy.
Now if you have more expertise yourself then you can actually lower the price so your target price should
be lower.
Because a lot of that burden of making decisions on the fly can be shifted onto you and that's where
you get the biggest project savings.
Now second thing to look at how much time are you going to spend on this project how much time are you
comfortable spending on this project.
If you want to spend a lot of time on the project then lowered the price it put your target lower towards
lower towards the end of the range.
Now if you don't want to spend a lot of time this is something you're outsourcing them aside and you
are completely busy doing other things then you need to raise your target.
Another thing to take into consideration.
Look at the specifications that you wrote later in this course we're actually going to cover how you
can do in-depth specifications and how you can do wireframe but also take into consideration how familiar
are you with the project that you're building.
Is this in a technology you have absolutely no familiarity with.
Is this in a section of your company or your business that you don't really deal with very often if
you don't have a lot of familiarity with what you're outsourcing or are contracting then you should
probably think about paying more so your ideal price should be a little bit higher in the relative range.
But if you're one of those people that just has an awesome spec sheet you spend a lot of time on it
researching it.
You know the problems that are going to arise you know what what's most important to the project and
what's not as important to the project and you can prioritize like that then you have an opportunity
for a lot more cost savings.
And the last thing that you should take into consideration is the freelancer or the firm itself.
Look at what they say to you if they have a very specific connection to what they're proposing and they're
articulate and they clearly have thought about your project then you need to give that person more value.
So if that person had a higher bid you should just kind of ignore their price and assume that they're
actually kind of in a sense cheaper.
Right.
Because the more they understand your project the higher likelihood that your projects are going to
be successful.
Similarly look at the portfolios of the people bidding if you have some of the fantastic portfolio that's
very articulate you should obviously value that person more.
So key takeaways from this lecture avoid the Goldilocks syndrome.
Don't just pick your price relative to the other prices you've gotten because that is not the truest
way of doing this.
Take into consideration you yourself your expertise.
How detailed are your spec sheets.
Did you do wireframe.
How familiar are you with the project and the technology itself and incorporate that into what your
ideal price should be.
More experience better specs more familiarity with the project you should have a lower ideal price and
you can save yourself a lot of money.
But on the flip side if you're unfamiliar you're inexperience and you're way too busy.
You need to raise your price.
Now again don't make your judgments solely based off the price.
Look at the individual freelancer.
If they have specific portfolio items that relate to your project you should value that person more.
And if they've actually taken time to think about your project it's not a cookie cutter message that
they send to you and you can tell that they're dynamic and they can think on their feet and it might
be the case that their price doesn't actually reflect how thoughtful they are they might be a cheaper
option when you can tell they actually have thought about your project and they're interested in it
you should give those people a bump.
OK so I don't really want to overwhelm you with different criteria you can use to pick your freelance
or run a cover or a ton of other ways and other factors you should put into your judgment when you're
actually picking someone.
But this is a pretty good guide.
Don't just go off of the price relative to others.
That is not the best way of getting the best price.
All right.
So in the next lecture.